you need to hear about this 72% of
people are struggling with stress 70%
have at least one feature of burnout and
we are seeing a rise in mental health
problems like we've never seen before
what's happening so as a doctor I can
tell you that doctor a did Nar is a
Harvard physician nationally recognized
stress expert who is understanding and
combating modern-day burnout when I was
a medical student working 80 hours a
week I was in my own stress struggle and
it was terrifying but I couldn't find a
doctor who could help so I became the
doctor I needed I uncovered all of these
studies and found a solution that wasn't
just try to relax we are seeing
increased rates of depression Sleep
Disorders fatigue or burnout because
stress is higher than ever Studies have
shown at least 60 to 80% of patient
visits have a stress related component
Jesus it's crazy and 60% of people with
burnout had an inability to disconnect
from work work and being addicted to
work can can't shut off and checking
your phone
2,600 times a day yes that is a
statistic so you might be experiencing a
typical burnout even 2/3 of parents have
burnout that's crazy and yet even though
we are all collectively experiencing it
it's so isolating the now 330 million
people go 2 weeks before speaking with
anyone so what can we do well these are
the five resets that are going to help
you survive and thrive
the first technique
is quick one this is really really
fascinating to me on the back end of our
YouTube channel it says that
69.9% of you that watch this channel
frequently over the lifetime of this
channel haven't yet hit the Subscribe
button I just wanted to ask you a favor
it helps this channel so much if you
choose to just subscribe helps us scale
the guest helps us scale the production
and it makes this show bigger so if I
could ask you for one favor if you've
watched the show before and you've
enjoyed it and you like this episode
that you're currently watching could you
please hit the Subscribe button thank
you so much and I will repay that
gesture by making sure that everything
we do here gets better and better and
better and better that is a promise I'm
willing to make you do we have a
[Music]
deal Dr adti
Nuka where does your story begin and
when I say that I'm talking about the
story that inspired the work you do on
stress burnout there tend to be a
catalyst moment in the experts that I
speak to's lives where something
happened which started a chain of events
the first Domo that fell which led them
to be sat here where does that story
begin for you my origin story as a
doctor with an expertise on stress
started as a stressed patient who
couldn't find a doctor with an expertise
in stress and I became the doctor I
needed at a time when I was in my own
stress struggle
what is the backdrop what is the
situation of stress the state of stress
in the world at the moment are we
getting more stressed as a
people we are seeing unprecedented
levels of stress in the world it is
affecting every single industry and no
country or group including you know all
ages all Industries all Races it is the
great
equalizer more now than ever so as a
physician and
clinician those of us who work in the
medical field stress has always been a
major problem we see it with our
patients but now if there is one silver
lining from the recent several years is
that now mental health stress burnout
the Lexicon has grown and it is
something that people are talking about
finally in the sea Suite in other areas
where before it was you know there was
so much taboo there still is but it is
finally getting the recognition it
deserves and stress right now is higher
at greater rates than ever what are the
what are those rates so typically 70% of
people have at least one feature of
burnout 72% of people are struggling
with stress and approximately that same
number have said that the past several
years have been the most stressful of
their entire professional
careers what's
happening a couple of things are
happening so going back to my own
personal stress story why did I have
those
palpitations at night as I was going to
bed I was developing something called a
delayed stress reaction and what happens
is under periods of acute stress like
the recent events that we've all endured
collectively as a global
whole during acute periods of stress we
Shore up our internal reserves as a
human being you often do not crack in
that moment you keep it together at all
costs I've seen this with my cancer
patients they have a cancer diagnosis
and they go through the treatment
radiation chemotherapy all of it and
they are fine they do not shed a tear
then when they get that first clean bill
of health from their doctors they are in
my office sobbing and everyone is
confused why now what's going on now
same thing with all of us you may be
feeling this way I may be too right now
it's that feeling of like okay we've
just lived through the pandemic we
should be celebrating I'm sure you've
seen every headline over the past
several years at least I did the Roaring
20s are coming the post-pandemic era the
guardian had a great piece on this and I
remember seeing headline upon headline
and I would just laugh because I would
think that is not how the brain works
the reason we are all feeling very much
not the Roaring 20s is because our
brains are built like dams so what
happens is when you are going through a
period of stress you Shore up your
internal reserves and you keep it
together at all costs that is just how
the brain is built when that acute
period of stress is over so in a cancer
patient the actual cancer treatment for
me as a medical resident going through
you know the difficult 30-hour workshift
and going to bed and for all of us
collectively going through the pandemic
experience and the various things that
have happened since we keep it together
but when we have that moment of respit
when that acute stressor is over then
our psychological defenses come down and
our true emotion can emerge and it's
often a deluge and it comes out in
different ways the manifestations of
stress are different but it's this
delayed stress response we are all
feeling it which is why none of us feel
like it's the Roaring 20s we are seeing
increased rates of mental health issues
anxiety depression Sleep Disorders
stress related disorders and a general
feeling of Mala or fatigue or burnout
now even more than we were back in 2020
or 2021 it's the delay stress reaction
what is stress we should probably Define
that word and I'd also like to try and
Define it against the word burnout are
they different things are they the same
thing do either of them
exist great question there is a
difference between acute stress and
chronic stress under normal
circumstances we function in resilient
mode and we're governed by the
prefrontal cortex the prefrontal cortex
is the part of our brain if you put your
hand here right behind the forehead and
it is the part of your brain that is
responsible for in scientific terms we
call it General executive function or
you know layman's terms adulting God
mine's
huge behind the
skull okay memory planning organization
this is what our strategic thinking
you're really good at these things
Stephen thank you thank you so much the
prefrontal cortex is what governs all of
that under stress we are governed not by
the prefrontal cortex but by the amydala
and the amydala is a tiny almond shaped
structure deep in our brains you can't
touch it it's not like the prefrontal
cortex right behind here it's like
between your ears deep down and that is
our emotional center it's the lyic
system and we often Call It The
Reptilian Brain because that part of our
brain has not evolved the way other
parts of our brain have so it's that and
the response that that amydala creates
is the fight ORF flight response that
stress response in our bodies so under
acute stress we are not governed by the
prefrontal cortex up here we are
governed by our amydala our brains and
our bodies are expertly designed to
manage acute stress we are built for
managing stress however nowadays so for
example let's talk a little bit about
the fight ORF flight response that the
amydala governs right back when we were
all cave people we were in the forest we
saw a tiger you would either flee or
fight and there's all of these bodily
mechanisms that happen when you are
engaged in the fight ORF flight response
your heart beats faster your lungs start
taking in more oxygen blood is shunted
away from your vital organs and it goes
to your muscle so you can either fight
or you can run your pupils dilate
there's so many biological physiological
mechanisms that happen with the figh ORF
flight response then when that acute
threat is over so you either have fought
or you have flown away from the tiger
you have a moment to recalibrate modern
day times there are no acute threats
anymore that all of our tigers are
chronic bills financial troubles marital
conflicts or relationship problems
health issues so there's this constant
low hum of that fight ORF flight
response in the distance and that is the
problem so acute stress we are good at
our brains and bodies are great at
managing and it serves a role right of
course it serves a role it's
evolutionarily healthy and we can talk
about the differences between healthy
stress and unhealthy stress but when it
starts becoming chronic that is when
burnout sets in your brain doesn't get
time to rest or recharge it's not like a
tiger in the forest where you fight
Fleet and then there's like a respit
time so it's just ongoing in the in the
background at a low hum at all times
what are the symptoms of burnout then
how do I know if I'm burnt out the
interesting thing about burnout is that
the definition is changing so earlier
when you think about burnout you know
what someone with burnout
has or you might yourself might think
like oh I know what burnout is I don't
have it that's a lot of people feel this
way classic typical symptoms of burnout
apathy lethargy feeling unproductive not
very motivated and the who in 2019
designated burnout as an occupational
phenomenon and a clinical syndrome which
was really validating for many people
who are feeling that way this is 2019
way before the pandemic in 2020 2021 and
202 22 what burnout is looking like has
changed so it is no longer these classic
typical symptoms now we are seeing
increasingly atypical features of
burnout in one study 60% of people with
burnout had an inability to disconnect
from work as their main feature of
burnout so it's not what you think when
you're thinking about the face of
burnout of someone who's really not
interested in work you could be that
person who is engaged in work and can't
shut off and you're thinking to yourself
this can't be burnout I'm totally you
know engaged in work in fact I can't
shut off my brain you might be
experiencing atypical burnout atypical
burnout because yeah when I think of
burnout I think of like oh like not
getting out of bed and losing motivation
but you're telling me that my addiction
to work might be a symptom and a sign of
being burnt out that's right so how do I
know because I'm addicted to my work I
love my work you know when you when it
is different from your Baseline being
addicted to work you love your work yes
but you also make time for sleep yeah
relationships and connections with loved
ones you feel a sense of Engagement in
the world it is not interfering with
your daytoday life so to speak okay so
when you are feeling that sense of
inability to unplug that means you're
checking your phone multiple times per
night because you feel like you have to
keep up you are trying to keep up in in
the hamster wheel situation where you
just can't and so there are many
manifestations of this atypical burnout
but that is one and so often what's
happening now is that people are feeling
burnt out again unprecedented rise right
in stress chronic stress and burnout and
often people don't recognize that it's
happening to them simply because the
face and definition of burnout is
changing how many people are burnt out
do they know have they done any studies
on that to figure out what that number
we don't know I mean it depends on the
sector so there are lots of studies on
burnout and so one big study it was done
on Parental burnout and found that
two-thirds of parents have burnout
2third Jesus 6% yeah and that is
probably underestimated and certainly
underreported so typically we're seeing
anywhere rates from 60 to 70% of people
note burnout but again think about
you know if you're if based on what
we've talked about if you are feeling
like I'm not burnt out so if you're
self-reporting burnout and you're saying
I don't really feel burnt out I'm very
engaged in my work in fact I check my
email 10 times a night you could
actually be having burnout there's also
a lot of stigma and shame on burnout so
people don't want to come forward and
say hey I might be stressed or I might
have burnout if I have that atypical
burnout why does it
matter it matters because your brain and
your body deserve a rest and to to
function
optimally you need to have spaciousness
you need you you know to function
optimally you need to have rest and when
you feel that sense of burnout you are
not thriving what if I don't feel it
what if I'm one of those people that you
just have said that's you know checking
my emails 15 times a night I see I seem
to be successful in my work I can't I'm
kind of out of balance in my life I
don't really have anything else going on
in my life I'm just work work work work
work work work but I don't necessarily
feel like there's anything wrong so if I
don't feel like there's anything wrong
if I'm successful in my work then what
is the case for making a change so I've
had lots of patients I had a clinical
practice in Boston and what you're
describing is the you know young
entrepreneur so many patients who are
young entrepreneurs and the question I
would always ask them is what's your
endgame so is it a Sprint or a marathon
are you looking to do this for two years
and you love it and then that's it
you're going to cash out or do you want
to think about what your life is going
to look like 10 20 30 years from now and
so they would think about it Ponder and
then say yeah I want to spend time you
know I my endgame is that I want to lead
a great life and I want to live until
I'm 75 or until I'm 100 and so if you
are on this fast track that you're
describing you know burnout is not
conducive with this idea of longevity
and having that long life that's what I
was thinking I was thinking of uh case
studies that I know of of people that I
think probably check their email 15
times night and I like that
and those that are out of balance I
think as you say you can do that
intensity but you can't do it
consistently like it's possible to be
that intense but it's not sustainable
and it doesn't allow you to achieve the
other things that life can offer you
that will make you happy there's no way
of being like that and having like a
healthy relationship with your family
building a family staying in shape and
all those are other things and that for
me is the really clear cost to that is
you just play it out zoom out on your
life in 10 years time something's going
to be broken something's got to give you
know we don't have I mean I think that's
a good segue into this idea of toxic
resilience it's like we don't all have
human beings we don't have an unlimited
amount of bandwidth there is a discret
amount of bandwidth that we all have
mental and physical and so if you are
not getting the proper rest that you
need and you're not sleeping as much as
you you know your body and brain need
and it's not about you as in personal I
don't need sleep I only need 4 hours
I've also had many patients who've said
that to me but your brain and your body
do physiologically and biologically need
a certain amount of rest simply for the
cellular function to continue but we've
got those posters up in our kitchens you
know not my kitchen obviously but some
people have their posters up in the
house the the Keep calm carry on that's
like a a Hallmark of society today is to
just tough it out and Carry On and we're
praised for that we're praised for our
resiliency res resilience is a good
thing right beautifully said Keep Calm
and Carry On resilience the true
scientific definition of resilience is
our innate biological ability to adapt
recover and grow in the face of life's
challenges but resilience doesn't
function in a vacuum you need stress for
resilience to show itself without stress
there can be no resilience so think of
swimming you the swimming structure is
the saying like you can make it to the
other side and your resilience is what
keeps your head up as you're swimming
while your arms are flailing and then
with time and practice it gets better
what you're describing Keep Calm and
Carry On is a manifestation of hustle
culture and it our entire modern society
is built on this idea of toxic
resilience and so what is toxic
resilience you have heard the word
resilience over your lifetime and you
had no real you know no real it had no
real charart right like you would listen
to that word and it would be like okay
fine and over the past several years
specifically 2020 2021 it was used it
was like a real buzzword at the start of
our quarantine we're resilient we're
going to get through this and it has
been misused and this is because of
Corporations and large companies said
you can work more you're working from
home now take on an extra project you're
resilient it doesn't matter that you're
doing child care and working you're
resilient and so you hear these toxic
messages all of the time resilience went
from being something that's true which
is honoring your boundaries making space
and time for rest and to recharge
focusing on a sense of self-compassion
and understanding that you are a human
being with limitations that is true
resilience toxic resilience is
productivity at all costs a mind over
matter mindset and what many of us think
of as true resilience is in fact toxic
resilience we are taught from a very
young age that dealing with discomfort
and being okay with discomfort is what
resilience is all about and I am here to
debunk that because absolutely not
resilience is our innate biological
ability but it also needs rest and
Recovery it is not meant to be toxic but
being resilient is that a good thing in
your view being a resilient person resil
being biological context I mean the
psych being psychologically resilient
being resilient is an excellent thing to
be it is something that we can learn how
to be better at and yes true resilience
is wonderful the challenge right now is
that many of us hear the word resilience
and we bristle at it I do when I hear
you know the messaging of toxic
resilience no one calls it toxic
resilience when they're giving you that
messaging they just say hey it's a
resilience it's cringeworthy right like
you hear it like oh be more resilient
and so yes true resilience is a gift it
is our innate biological ability we all
have the power and the aptitude for True
resilience but toxic resilience is what
we often see and what is often promoted
and that is something that needs to stop
do you think uh people are getting more
or less resilient with the nature of the
way that the world is I often have the
conversation about whether you know the
boomer generation are more or less
resilient than the genz or whatever it's
coming next what's next is it like Alpha
I think it's generation Alpha these new
generations and the argument the
stereotypical argument is that because
the boomer generation were working in
factories and mines and they were doing
harder labor and they had less
comparison because they didn't have
social media and they didn't see you
know the mate down the road having a
Chua fra L yata during their lunch break
and doing yoga sessions whatever then
they are more resilient and the genz
they got it easy they're all doing like
you know breath work and yoga for six
hours a day that is is that true I would
say no because we know that with jenz
and other younger populations we're
seeing a rise in mental health burnout
stress like we've never seen before and
I don't think it's because they're quote
unquote less resilient they are managing
lots and lots of onslaughts you know
they've lived through something really
awful they've had a sense of collective
trauma their minds are still young they
haven't had that lived experience of you
know Decades of going through stuff so
no I don't think so
and of course the older generation is
going to say that I remember when I was
in my medical training you know people
would say ah 80 hours it's all you're
working because we worked 120 hours
because there was some reform in terms
of like how many hours we could work as
medical residents and 80 hours felt
awful to me and so I think it's
important to validate and normalize
people's difficult experience and it's
not about what happened to you you know
like so in this example about prior
Generations it's about helping people
people feel a sense of validation
because if you you need to name it to
tame it and so for example when you are
going through a difficult experience
like a young person there are there's
such a rise of anxiety depression stress
related conditions Sleep Disorders
mental health challenges physical health
challenges in the younger population
it's not because they're not resilient
it's because they're living in a
hyperconnected world and that is causing
all sorts of issues down the road for
them both Mental Health and physical
health so I reject this idea that the
older generation was more resilient they
had less stimulation and they had you
know different they had different
challenges but I think it's important to
normalize and validate the difficult
experience that people are having I want
to go through your book now which is
called the five resets which is released
January 2024 very exciting um which
really aims to take on how we deal with
stress how we manage stress there's sort
of shap of neuroplasticity and how we
can change our our responses to stress
but I guess this first question about
the canary and the coal mine why did you
write about that what's that got to do
with stress it has everything to do with
stress because stress is something that
is so individualized and that's
something that we were talking about
earlier right like some people who feel
a sense of stress have physical
manifestations like I had palpitations
you had palpitations someone else might
have headaches neck pain shoulder pain
back pain P GI upset gastrointestinal
issues dizziness fatigue sleep problems
irritability anger the list goes on and
on it's it's like NeverEnding list and
the canary and the coal mine is my way
of personally it's my way of really
explaining this idea of the physical
manifestations of stress so my canary in
the coal mine was
palpitations what is that phrase I've
never heard the phrase the canary and
the coal mine well I've heard the phrase
before but I've just kind of been one of
those people that pretends they know
what it means the canary and the coal
mine is a historical reference back when
there were coal miners they would bring
a canary a bird down into the mines with
them the bird would sing its Canary song
when the air got bad the workers were
just working right like 12-hour days and
continued to work when the air got bad
they the canary would stop singing they
were in their mode they didn't
understand you know they weren't paying
attention and when the canary stopped
singing that was the first tell that the
air is bad before any physical or mental
health ramifications for the workers and
so the coal miners when they stopped
hearing the canary song they would leave
the mine with the canary and it was the
first tell of something going arai and
so everyone has a canary within them
that tells them a signal a song that is
telling them that there is something
happening with their stress I didn't pay
attention to it it took a the
palpitations to occur every single night
for two weeks before I sat up and took
notice all of the physical
manifestations of stress that I've
mentioned of course you need to see a
doctor like you and I did got the full
workup and been told stress is often
what we call a diagnosis of exclusion
meaning you rule out any organic
problems and then you say okay this is
because of stress so seeing your doctor
and getting that full work up is
important I have to say that as a
medical professional because I believe
in the medical system and I'm part of
the medical system and so the canary and
the coal mine is this idea that we all
have a song a stress song and our body
is trying to tell us something and
understanding that Canary symptom for
you you know takes a little time to dig
through but once you kind of figure it
out then you can use that we all have
our Achilles heel of something that is
the tell so when if you have a medical
condition like say peptic ulcer disease
that's easy to understand you know you
feel like oh I have stomach pain and so
I can't eat certain foods and I need to
take care of myself and there'll be a
flare and then you manage that symptom
and it goes away and you know you know
what that tell is of peptic ulcer
disease stomach pain but for stress
often things are happening to your body
and you're not even aware of what that
physical manifestation is that's not to
say that it's you know your headaches
are cused by stress but they're
certainly worsened by stress so when you
have a certain symptom happening to your
body understanding that hey that could
be my canary song I think everybody
intuitively knows what their Canary is I
think everybody knows what their I've
got a bunch of different ones um
whenever I'm stressed and you I I don't
even know when I'm stressed but I don't
know why but I don't I don't know
consciously that I'm stressed but
certain things start to happen I have
this really weird one where on my tongue
I'll get a little bit of like a not like
an ulcer it's kind of feels like I've
got a spot on my tongue I get that
whenever I'm stressed my skin gets worse
so I get like spots in my face when I'm
stressed um there's a few of them I I
I'll get a cold pretty much exclusively
when I'm stressed which happens about
one time once every six months or so I
think generally I manag stress well
generally but I'm not immune I Once Upon
a Time thought I was immune I thought
stress and all these other things and
mental health or happen to other people
turns out happens to me too that's right
you know and I think I really pushed
myself for a good five six seven 10
years you know I was a CEO of a company
that had hundreds and hundreds and
hundreds of employees um and I was 25 23
24 25 26 27 so I pushed myself very hard
and I think for the first couple of
years I withstood it but then as time
went on you know I was not able to
outrun the inevitable um and that's that
resilience myth you know that like
resilient people don't get burned out it
can't be me of course of course I'm not
stressed I someone like like me couldn't
even fathom being stressed and I have
seen thousands of people who have said
that very thing I said the exact same
thing during my stress struggle stress
doesn't happen to people like me it's
you don't want to admit it either
because there's a there's an element of
it where you go I don't want to be
[__] weak I don't want to be the weak
person if I'm if I'm experiencing stress
or I'm burnt out then that makes me
inadequate in some way so I don't want
to talk about that you know but I I I
think I've been a victim of that like
that Pride that ego especially as like a
as like a man and like a CEO and all
things that are stereotypically
toxically associated with strength um
I've never wanted to admit that I was
stressed ever I don't think I've ever
actually said the word to anybody but
I've definitely been stressed and I know
because my body told me and it tells me
in a very predictable way that Canary
stopped singing so I just think that's
important because it's Your Mind Body
Connection and once you see it you
cannot unsee it it's like gravity it's
all around you it's working in the
background all the time and then
suddenly you start paying attention and
it's like oh my God and on that point of
it feeling like evidence of your
inadequacy it's actually evidence that
you're a human that you're perfectly
normal that you're that you're not
broken versus this idea that it's
evidence that you're broken um
beautifully said Thank you really just
have you listen to this podcast before
I'm joking I am joking for the record
testing testing one two three I am a
Avid fan of this podcast and I have
listened countless times and
I this is the one podcast I regularly
listen to on my morning walks and I have
shared on Instagram probably hundreds of
lessons in my stories about what I've
learned on this
podcast thank you
so stress on the brain you WR about that
in your book as well I know that stress
causes cortisol this is my very limited
understanding of stress it causes C
cortisol talk me through that and then I
have this other question that I wanted
to ask you about the contagion of stress
if I am stressed and Jack is over there
will Jack feel my
stress so let's talk about stress and
the main Highway of stress in the brain
and the body it is the HPA axis H stands
for hypothalamus P stands for pituitary
gland a stands for the adrenal glands
the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis
mouthful but the H and P part of the
axis is in your brain and the a part of
the axis is above your kidneys the
adrenal glands and that is the
information Highway that is responsible
for our stress response it's all of the
things that we talked about the figh ORF
flight response it makes our heartbeat
it makes you know it does all sorts of
stuff The amydala Works in that HPA axis
as well and other parts of the brain the
prefrontal cortex Etc so when when You'
have that experience of stress and this
we're talking about acute stress this is
what is happening to you your brain and
your body are sinking up and reacting
there's a Cascade of hormones that
happens in the body and that is what you
feel as wow I'm stressed or like you
describe this discomfort or familiar
feeling of like wait a second I know
what this is It's that thing that I have
when I'm under pressure under situations
that are tense
and that is the stress
response and that is essentially what is
happening to our bodies when we are
feeling that figh ORF flight syndrome
unfortunately what often happens with
the amydala is that while it is helping
with this figh ORF flight syndrome and
the HPA axis it with chronic stress does
not shut off and that is the problem so
those hormones are just flowing through
that high highway all the time and
cortisol is our stress hormone and it's
all part of that as well because
cortisol surges during you know
adrenaline neur adrenaline all of these
hormones are working through our bodies
and surging through our bloodstream
cortisol is also a stress hormone and so
when we have chronically elevated levels
of cortisol all sorts of Badness can
happen is stress contagious because I
was on I was on Google and I T typed in
is stress contagious and it says that in
a workplace stress is
contagious stress is not contagious in
the way that you think of a virus or
microbes are contagious as far as I am
aware now there might be emerging data
to suggest otherwise but it is not like
a microbe where like it's going to
spread like the a virus that it's going
to spread from me to you for example but
CU there are hormones aren't there that
spread like pherom is it pheromones
pheromones but that's different that's
like you know that's more for like like
attraction sex and other things like
Charisma Etc what is kind of contagious
and I want to use that word Loosely is
like emotion so yes creating a toxic
environment right like we call it in pop
culture like a Vibe like that person
just didn't have a good vibe what's
really interesting and there it's
anecdotal there isn't a ton of research
to support this but I find this
fascinating that the heart has a
electromagnetic field that extends 15 ft
that's something that one of my early
mentors had told me
and so that is that vibe that you sense
from people like you feel that goodness
right like when you meet someone that
you just really like their heart you
know it's like heart
expansiveness so and other people we're
five feet away from each other so your
heart its electromagnetic field is
overlapping with my heart's
electromagnetic field right now so they
say now I've heard this in lots of you
know know lots of people say this but I
have also dug deep into the science of
like does this even exist is that is
this even a real thing and I'm not sure
if it's a real thing because I haven't
found like multiple scientific studies
that show robust data that yes this is a
real thing but it is a fascinating thing
to think about as a mind exercise not So
Much from the scientific perspective but
like from a human lived experience
perspective of you know and I try to
think about that when I enter a room
certainly when I'm with a patient we
call it the therapeutic presence or the
therapeutic encounter and it's this idea
that when you are with a patient or
right now I'm talking to you and I Am
the Doctor talking to you right not your
doctor of course but it's this idea that
you have that you can have a therapeutic
experience I try to engage in the
therapeutic encounter at every talk
anytime I'm speaking to an audience I
want people to leave feeling a sense of
healing healing and cure are two
different things by the way so I'm not
saying like I'm you know we're going to
talk and then it's like you're going to
be cured of whatever illness wait I
can't wait of some of those tongue spots
but it's like it's this idea of like
feeling that sense of healing and it's
the therapeutic encounter there is
science behind the therapeutic encounter
and what that simply means is that
doctors who have that sense of
therapeutic presence you know exactly
what I mean you might not call it that
and then you also have had lots of
doctors who've had no therapeutic
presence and you know what that feels
like too how does one get a therapeutic
presence it's something that needs to be
cultivated of course it's something that
you know you can have but then you
cultivate it with training and practice
Etc but the therapeutic presence that
therapeutic encounter has been shown to
actually have health outcomes so greater
adherence you know to medication tighter
glucose control decreased asthma flares
like real concrete Health outcomes when
you have a therapeutic encounter with in
that doctor patient relationship so
there is some magic secret sauce
happening in that encounter and what is
it how do I cultivate it are there any
tricks any any tips tricks is there like
a body language thing maybe I don't yes
so as a doctor I can tell you that there
is lots of studies there are lots of
studies which show that it's not really
the amount of time you spend with
someone it's your body and so for
example they've been they've done
studies on doctors who stand for let's
say s minutes and talk to the patient
versus a doctor who sits down makes eye
contact and is at the same level or a
lower level than the patient the patient
has a perceived sense that this doctor
cares more and is more engaged and has a
therapeutic presence no difference in
time I think that's the great myth that
people say you know oh I need to spend
more time to create a therapeutic
presence it's not about the time spent
it's about how you are spending the time
and the quality of time so that's like
one trick that you could try eye level
you mentioned eye level there being at
the same eye level or lower because it's
a power Dynamic think about when you're
seeing if you were in the hospital and
you were lying in a hospital bed and
your doctor came in and you're lying
there and the doctor is speaking above
you does that feel therapeutic in any
way not really but if the doctor came
pulled up a chair sat next to you and
looked at you eye level that's why when
you're talking to a child it's better to
bend down and make you know get on their
level and talk to them and if I'm a
meeting and my chair is maybe a little
bit higher and I'm speaking to a client
and I want the client to do a deal with
me it's best for me to get down to their
eye level it depends because in that
situation you know again this is like
what you were talking about earlier like
there's times when you want to show a
sense of like power and therapeutic
presence is not a sense of power right
it's a sense of equality compassion
empathy are these the qualities that
you're trying to create in a business
interaction I don't know maybe well one
of the we've learned from I don't know
I've been making content for about 10 15
years now for a long time making lots of
videos one of the things we've learned
is that the engagement goes
significantly up if you are on the ey
line of the camera so you'll notice in
the D of a
CEO we don't shoot from above we don't
shoot from below we go to Great Lengths
to make sure that the camera is is on
eyeline and we just see that the
engagement numbers are higher and
actually the more down the barrel it is
especially looking into this camera here
the more down the barrel and the more on
eyland I am the better the engagement
with the video we've just seen that over
thousands and thousands of videos we've
made so that's why the the podcast is
set up like this where there's we're
we're on your eyeline and we're on down
the barrel as much as we possibly can be
without you seeing too much of the back
of my head there and the same applies
for this one because it just makes for
some reason the engagement with the
audience is better we see it in the
numbers interesting and there's so many
tricks that you could use I mean like
sitting down eye level is one um
mirroring also something else this is
not related to stress but it's like
mirroring so for example as I'm talking
to you as you're talking if I do this if
I do this and then you're like oh this
person is like totally following your
mind but it's like if I start doing this
you just did this and so I did this so
there's like mirroring is something that
you you know there's lots of ways to dry
that but again it has to by science yes
it the key is authenticity though right
like you can do all of these things but
ultimately authenticity and the human
the really fascinating thing about
podcasting by the way and any sort of
connection with another human being is
the voice so we as children as infants
we are highly attuned to voice it's one
of our first Primal instincts right like
hearing our mother's voice or our
caregivers Voice or our parents
voice and we can our BS meter with voice
is high so if someone isn't authentic
authentic and that is why the audio
version like so listening to a podcast
the reason like you can always sus out
like who is uh for example I don't know
like who's telling the truth and who's
not and it's not like something that you
can explain you just like you're like oh
I don't really like this person or I
really like this person it's because
they lead with authenticity
vulnerability all of these things that
you know the likability factor is high
it's because our brains are primed to
recognize and register the human voice
in a way that's very different from the
physical so yes we of course like we see
someone and you get the whole picture
yes but when you hear them in your ear
there's like something that is deeply
intimate about that experience and that
you know evolutionarily and even like in
our own life it's um very poignant and
it's an intuitive thing we don't
necessarily know what it is about a
voice that's authentic it's just a
feeling you feel it and you know it
because when you hear someone on a
podcast you immediately are like oh yeah
I like this and you don't know why you
like it or you know you feel that
connection it's like the voice is a very
primitive thing and it's also like it's
it was because we formed those
connections and synapses in our brain
preverbal right like when we were
infants same thing with
smell you know you smell something and
it takes you right back to that moment I
was so fascinated I remember where I was
when someone told me about pheromones
that there's these chemicals that
like leave our bodies and then inter my
chemicals will interfere with your
chemicals I just thought that was
absolute Witchcraft and I'm a very like
logical science based person so I need
science and evidence to believe anything
and then when I heard this rumor that
like you know if you put a a my mother
and my sister in the same house their
menstrual cycles would sink up that's
right I Googled it to check if it was
true Google told me it was true and then
I
thought [__] I now believe in witchcraft
do you know what I mean like if well
have you read the book The Red Tent I
mean it's like very much along those
lines of like Biblical times they had a
red red tent for women menstruating
women and then it would just like the
whole tribe would like sink up and
they'd be in The Red Tent during
menstruating times they've done studies
with um t-shirts and attractiveness so
you will smell a t-shirt that you know
they've done studies with women and men
have worn the t-shirts and then you
smell the t-shirt and you say like I
like this scent or I don't and it's not
body odor it's fair phones and um
they've matched it with like the
phermones that you like and then you see
the visual and there's a match like this
person is attractive and then you smell
the fairmon and there's like a match
it's that person's fairmon um often they
say like you you described your mother
and your sister for example they say
that like genetically the more different
the more attractive right because we're
always trying
to so if you of course there's like a
comfort thing of like you know your
mother and like that's different because
phermones are mostly for um
attractiveness and mating behavior so
it's not
about comfort you know I guess there
might be some studies about comfort and
maternal comfort and um self- soothing
or soothing with your parent or
caregiver but most of the fairon
research that I am aware of is um like
sexuality attractiveness Charisma um but
mostly due to mating behavior um so
going back to this subjective
stress I get stressed now I kind of
understand the difference between acute
stress and sort of chronic stress which
is a very bad thing in your book you
talk about the resilience rule of
two yes the resilience rule of two is
how our brains make change possible
so when we are undergoing a change even
a positive change in our life like let's
say you know I've had a patient who came
to see me and had a binder filled of
things that he was trying and it was
like the kit everything but the kitchen
sink approach and so he came to see me
and was like Doc I've been doing a great
job it's been a month and now I'm in
month two and I don't want to do any of
it and I'm
done and he was under a lot of stress
and he was trying all sorts of things
we've all been there we've tried lots of
different things and then you just
say okay I'm done can't do any of it why
our brains even when we're making
positive changes like let's say you
recognize like yeah I think stress is a
problem in my life I'm going to make a
change I'm going to start eating better
and I'm going to start exercising and
sleeping better and I'm going to spend
time with friends and I'm going to do
less work I'm going to do all of these
things to help my life and you know make
a big lifestyle overhaul and I'm really
stressed it will not last because our
brains have the ability to make two new
changes at a time because even positive
change like all of these things that
we're describing right now are a
stressor to your brain how do we know
that how do we know we can only make two
changes at once the basis of the rule of
two is based on a seminal Landmark study
in the 1960s by two psychiatrists
doctors Holmes and rahy they looked at
5,000 people and looked at 43 common
conditions like life events that happen
in people's lives the most common ones
graduation getting a new job buying your
first home a outstanding Personal
Achievement getting married having a
child getting a divorce death of a loved
one 43 of the most common conditions and
when in every single condition good and
bad got a score they studied 5,000
people and found that the more life
events someone accured and it's not
about like age or you know chronology of
age it's just the more life events a
person accured the greater their stress
the greater the likelihood also that
they would develop an illness later in
life and that Holmes and Rahi study is
the basis of this rule of two because
what they discovered is that positive
life changes are also a stress to your
brain and your body and that is because
there is a certain level of adapting you
know there's a certain level of human
adaptation that needs to happen with
something positive and fantastic that
happens in your life to regain the
stability that you had before think
about your own life there are probably
so many examples I recently moved into a
new home everyone was like
congratulations this is amazing a new
home and it was wonderful for a few
months and then like also incredibly
stressful and then of course I had the
delayed stress reaction 3 months later
right like where you're running on
adrenaline initially and everything is
great and then that stops and then
you're you know having sleepless nights
about all the various stressors so the
rule of two is based on this idea that
positive life events things that you
think might be really helpful to you to
manage your stress if you do them all at
once chances are it's not going to stick
so instead aim to do two new things at a
time build them into your life over time
in the five resets I offer five mindset
shifts 15 science back strategies and
every step of the way it's about two
small changes at a time you work with
your biology of stress rather than
against it and competing against it that
is how you make change possible in
clinical practice when I was a med
medical resident learning how to take
care of patients my mentors would do the
same thing so this is 50 years later
after that study they T taught me that
when I'm seeing a patient you know a
patient will come in with a laundry list
of symptoms or they will have six seven
eight medical conditions you always
focus on two things because if you say
to the patient I really think you should
stop smoking here's some suggestions
let's work on your weight and get your
weight better let's work on your
cholesterol how about your blood
pressure how about minimizing chances of
cancer too overwhelming for the brain to
sustain instead let's focus on getting
you to stop smoking and let's focus on
lowering your cholesterol these are two
tangible things that you can work on it
takes about 8 weeks to build a habit
once you are engaged and that has become
a habit for you then you add two new
things let eight weeks go by then two
new things so over time you do address
that laundry list of symptoms or in this
patient's case you know all eight
medical diagnosis in the other patients
case who came in with everything but the
kitchen sink approach to managing his
stress we eventually did get all the way
to the finish line of fixing his stress
and addressing all of the issues but it
only happens two small incremental steps
at a time the five resets the first of
those resets is to get clear on what
matters the most when you are feeling a
sense of stress you are living in
survival mode you are governed by your
amydala its focus is self-preservation
you are literally living in the moment
your prefrontal cortex is the area of
your brain that like we said behind the
forehead that governs Forward Thinking
planning
organization when you tell someone who
is deeply stressed and in a crisis or
fight ORF flight mode oh just figure it
out you know make a plan figure out
what's going to help you and just do it
mind or matter none of that helps it is
also biologically impossible to think
five 10 steps ahead when you are living
in fight ORF flight mode governed by
your amydala the first reset get clear
on what matters most offers three
concrete science back strategies that
can help you when you are feeling a
sense of stress and you're in fight ORF
flight mode to help get out of your own
way create a road map appap and a plan
forward so it actively through going the
go by going through these strategies you
slowly get out of that amydala mode and
back to letting your prefrontal cortex
take over so how do I figure out what
matters to me most is there a system yes
most is an acronym m o s t and the book
has a whole strategy of how to figure
out what matters to you most because
it's not so much what's the matter with
me it's what matters to me most so when
you shift that framework and stop
blaming yourself and criticizing
yourself of like this you know what's
the matter with me why do I feel like
this instead have an external why we
know that when you have a why you can
get through things right like you have a
Nord star of like how do you want to get
to that place and so my job is to hold
up a mirror and say this is your why
because you f you figured it out using
the strategies the first reset will get
you a clear plan and road map to that
destination so I'm going to do the first
reset um so you have a stress score that
you sort of initially do with your
patients right so you figure out how
stressed they are that's right there's
some questions I think in the book which
I'll put up on the screen for anyone
that's watching the video these are
questions you ask your patient to help
them figure out their stress score yes
and then the first reset is really
figuring out what matters to them which
is the acronym you're talking about
about most motivating objective small
And Timely that's like a what am I doing
with that so I'm setting myself a a goal
or understanding what matters what goals
matter to me and I want those goals to
be motivating objective which means um
can you objectively and easily monitor
this goal's progress small is the goal
small enough to guarantee success and
timely is the goal time sensitive can
you achieve it in the next 3 months I've
had so many patients when I was seeing
patients in Boston I have had so many
patients who have been stressed and they
want to feel better but they don't know
why because they are consumed with
what's matter what's the matter with me
what's the matter with me rather than
what matters most to me and so this is a
way to reframe that internal dialogue
and the conversation to what matters
most to you and so you figure out what
your most goal is and there are many
examples throughout the book the book is
filled with patient stories real life
people who've had lots of different
experiences and they're examples of most
goals you know some most goals have been
I want to throw I want to teach my
grandson how to throw a baseball I want
to go this summer on a hike and my
knee's not hurt how does that help me
with my stress because you have
something to look forward to okay it
takes me out of the present moment and
it also gives you something measurable
you know when we stress can often feel
like this vague nebulous thing that's
happen happening to us right but we need
a metric to measure our progress and the
book is filled with metrics and so the
most goal is your first sort of like
Nord star of this is where you want to
go and then there are various other
strategies throughout the Book of like
how to get there and what to measure we
do this with I don't know we do this
with every single we do this with blood
pressure we check to see like if you
have high blood pressure we check like
oh your blood pressure is getting better
with these interventions but we don't do
anything when it comes to stress we just
say like are you feeling better yes or
no and stress is not a yes or no
question there are degrees and shades of
stress in there so you need a
quantifiable metric to say yes my stress
is getting better why because I wanted
to walk 20 blocks and guess what I could
walk zero blocks when I started with you
but now I can walk five blocks and that
is good so whatever that goal is for you
of like you're feeling a lot of stress
because you've had a medical issue or
you know whatever that most goal to you
is finding that goal post to say like
okay that's my destination and this is
where I am today and then finding a way
to get there in um this this team here
there's about 30 of us at the D Co and
we we have a group inside the company
which is about exercise and fitness and
we do that because so many members of
the team love to exercise I mean even
the team here in New York City they went
out for a long run all of them together
um in the morning and I think you know
we do that because we have goals for
fitness and we like exercise whatever
else what is the evidence that shows
exercise helps with Stress Management
what is the research reams of research
on exercise helping with stress and the
real misconception is that you have to
do a lot of exercise to manage stress
and that is unequivocally false even a
little bit of exercise can help because
it gets you out of your head and into
your body a few minutes here and there
can make all the difference Park far
away way when you're driving someplace
and you're going to a restaurant or
you're going into a mall a shopping
Center Park far and walk if you can
build it into your day throughout the
day take the stairs if you can it is
just small incremental changes over the
course of a day aim for 20-minute walk
it has lots of health benefits it gets
you out of your head into your body it
gets you into that daily habit of
movement initially when you are a
sedentary person and a lifelong non-ex
exerciser going into the gym to exercise
is like a complete deterrent I remember
as a medical resident when I was going
through my stress struggle I had a
state-of-the-art gym in my building I
remember being incredibly stressed and
you know I'm a doctor I was like oh yeah
exercise is good for me I walked into
the gym I saw the mirrors I saw all of
the fancy equipment the Techno music
blasting I walked right out walked right
out I then started a walking regimen
simply because it was nice out one day
and I walked around the block and and
then I was like oh that felt really nice
next day I walked around the block and
then some did a 5 10 minute extra walk
and then the next day it was manageable
it was a low lift it was easy for me to
do it wasn't like all this complicated
equipment so I walked a little bit more
and I just gradually moved up over the
course of a week or two to 20 minutes
and then I committed to a 20 minute walk
over time my self-efficacy which is that
ability of of you to know like oh I can
do this it increased and that's what
happens when you exercise and you do
something like this something small a
little bit every day your sense of
self-efficacy increases so you feel like
oh I can do this and your inner critic
starts
silencing and I started just the Walkers
you know not the extreme exercises just
the Walkers you're telling me there's
research that shows those people have
are less stressed in their lives and
more resilient per se it's not so much
that Walkers are less stressed it's that
movement when you go from being
sedentary to moving that daily physical
activity even at low levels can help
decrease your stress so it's not like at
why and how so many reasons so the first
reason is because something like walking
is something that's a very natural
phenomenon that all of us do we don't
really feel like walking when we are
feeling a sense of stress you just want
to be still but science shows that you
know you've heard of the expression
sitting is a new smoking you've heard of
that expression but a research study
found that sitting can also increase
your sense of anxiety so it's not so
much that sitting is the new smoking per
se yes but it also has a tremendous
impact on your actual mental health and
that movement is a antidote to that so
it's not necessary that you have to do
excessive exercise but even just a
simple walk getting out lowgrade
exercise has been shown to help with
longevity it's been it's been shown to
help with so many markers of Health just
a simple walk and yes your team you know
people like to run I'm not saying that
like you don't you could you can
continue running but that's someone who
is like a Avid exerciser and so they run
some people walk it doesn't really
matter what you do it's that you do
something you enjoy a little bit every
day I want to talk about social media
and in your book you use this term
popcorn brain
which I for a second when I read what
popcorn brain men started to think maybe
I now have a popcorn brain what is a
popcorn
brain many people most people have
popcorn brain popcorn brain is a
biological phenomenon a real biological
phenomenon cor coined by a man named Dr
Levy a
psychologist and it is essentially your
brain circuitry starting to pop based on
over stimulation so it's not like your
brain is actually popping but it's that
sensation of
popcorning because of spending too much
time
online it is hard to disengage from
what's Happening online because there's
a constant information stream and it is
difficult to live fully offline where
life moves at a decidedly slower Pace
popcorn brain is an Affliction that
nearly every single person has right now
think about what you do when you're
waiting in line at the grocery store
you're not just like letting your brain
wander pondering things you are on your
phone what are you doing at the bank on
your phone at a car wash at a traffic
light pedestrians walking across the
street they're not looking up at the
light in fact it's like one of the
hazards a public health hazard of you
know pedestrians having near Miss
accidents because they're looking down
on your phone I see it in Boston all the
time a busy street and people are
looking at their phone most people
listening now will be like on a tube
somewhere on a train on a plane looking
at their phone well they're listening to
this but we rarely give our brains a
moment of rest so popcorn brain is
different a lot of people will ask me is
popcorn brain internet addiction no
internet addiction is a real it's called
internet addiction disorder it's a DS
sm4 criteria and it means that's our
diagnostic criteria in um medicine and
it's a real disorder but what really
defines internet addiction and popcorn
brain is that internet addiction
interferes with your life where you're
unable to do certain things popcorn
brain on the other hand is ubiquitous
it's everywhere it is what defines
Modern Life those two are very different
things and when we are feeling a sense
of stress we are especially prone to
popcorn brain why because when we feel
stress we talked about the amydala right
like that part of our brain that is
focused on survival and
self-preservation back evolutionarily
when we were all cave people there was a
Night Watch Person
and that person would sit by the fire
the tribe would sleep and that person
would scan for danger to keep the tribe
safe in modern times we have all become
that night watch person and we scroll
incessantly when we feel a sense of
stress because it is our Primal urge it
is the way our amydala feels a sense of
safety because we are scanning for
danger we are no longer in a tribe we're
not cave people anymore so what do we do
we scroll that is how we are scanning
for danger especially when we are
feeling stressed in recent times there
has been a lot of bad news in fact it
feels like the onslaught of bad news one
thing after another whether it's a
climate disaster or a conflict in a
certain part of the world or something
or the other is always happening now the
information stream it is rapid and
unprecedented and so we are constantly
scrolling and scanning for danger and
it's that Primal urge to scroll so how
do we the goal is really not to limit
our social media use or media use
because we know Studies have shown that
it is not about abstinence because that
actually doesn't have an impact a
positive impact on our mental health or
our well-being but what does have an
impact on our mental health and
well-being is decreasing our Reliance to
our phones you know most of us check our
phones
2,600 times a day that is a statistic
2,6 17 times a day is the average number
of times a person looks at their phone
think about that right the other thing
you want to think about is when you're
thinking about like huh do I am I do I
have a Reliance on my phone it's like
the goal here is to reconsider your
relationship with your phone it is not
about abstinence we're not trying to
become digital monks here it's about
creating digital boundaries in every
relationship in your life you have
boundaries you have a boundary with your
partner with your children with your
colleagues because relationships need
boundaries right to thrive why don't we
have a boundary when it comes to the
relationship we have with our phone
there is no boundary it is simply porous
we check in the morning we check at
night what's the first thing you do when
you wake up before your second eye is
even open you are
scrolling studies show that 62% of
people check their phones within 15
minutes of waking up and about 50% check
them in the middle of the night I'm
guilty of this like I'm not going to
pretend I'm some Saint here I'm that
person I'm on on the upper end of that
scale I'm glued to my phone glued to my
phone and you know what when I'm
stressed I'm even more glued to it that
is facts I tell you when I'm stressed I
got some bad habits it's your Primal
Arch to scroll it's a feedback loop you
want to feel safe out the
window you know all kinds of bad habits
that are about the diet piece we can't
talk about but we can talk about the
diet piece for some reason if there's
ever a time in my life where my diet
slips it's when work is hard or when I'm
you know when something's difficult in
my life that's when I I just can't get
out of that bad diet up for just you
just a moment so we can do a small
caveat because I think the social media
piece is really interesting and what
people like everyone loves hearing about
that the reason that you crave high
so emotional eating is what you're
describing when you're saying that your
diet goes out the window and you're
feeling a sense of stress and that is
because you're amydala when you're
amydala like I said it's like I'm like a
broken record when I say your amydala is
focused on survival and
self-preservation your amydala doesn't
recognize a famine coming or bills or
work stress right it's The Reptilian
part of your brain and so it is focused
on survival and calories equals survival
so when you are stress eating or
emotional eating your body body craves
high fat high sugar foods that's just
biologically what your body craves and
that is why instead of berating yourself
and letting that inner critic really
instead of berating yourself and letting
that inner critic really take off like
when you're craving you know chocolate
cake or my guilty pleasure is tortilla
chips I just can't get enough when I'm
under stress what's your stress food
your
business carrot cake oh my God I didn't
listen I can't get carrot so you know
carrot cake is not easy to get you can't
bake it yourself very easily but um I'd
say like just things like that like
sweet Foods my probably my my thing when
when I'm really stressed and sometimes I
go through these periods maybe once
every like three to four I'm like really
I think generally if you see what I eat
I think I'm really healthy I think I I
do what I say but there are moments you
know and it should be that way because
you're a human being and it es and flows
and so you're not a robot you're a mere
mortal as am I and so even though I know
all of the science like put a chocolate
cake in front of me when I'm stressed
and I will of course it's my biology
anyway so we can talk about social media
if you wish but that is an important
caveat because I think people often when
you're stress eating and you're feeling
a lot of stress like you even said right
like I hate myself when I'm my diet is
off I start beating myself up I'm like
Steve listen you got bloody podcast
there people that follow you that like
you know I think like you got you got to
live what you say and then I'll just go
through that moment of it's like it
feels like most most of the time I've
got my hands on the steering wheel and
I'm in charge and then once in a while
I'm in the back seat and this car is on
autopilot and and we're just flying down
the motorway and I'm I'm like Jesus I'm
I'm trying to get back into the front
seat and I'm struggling against I don't
know the wind the windows are open
shit's flying everywhere and then
eventually I get hold of the steering
wheel again with one hand and then I can
kind of pull myself back onto the
steering wheel and we have another good
couple of months you know dis returns
and that ability that you have that
where you are able to get out of the
back seat get your whereabouts and get
back into the front seat and the
driver's seat that time for you is
likely maybe a week maybe two weeks Max
yeah and because you have all of this
knowledge and you've done this before
it's a muscle right it like grows that
sense of agency and like I can do this I
know how to get this back on track yeah
for others who may not have the the
practice that you have or the knowledge
it takes a longer time and that is what
I am trying to work on is like closing
the gap between knowledge and action
understanding by the way that your brain
it takes 8 weeks to build a habit and
falling off the wagon is part of habit
building so how how do we close that Gap
some there's going to be people
listening to this now that heard
everything you've said they want to
implement better habits in their life to
counteract the stress they're
experiencing they want to get away from
that red velvet carrot cake whatever um
but they don't have that sense of agency
or they struggle to a more extreme
extent you don't have to have a sense of
agency in fact my favorite patients have
been the skeptical patients and people
were like I don't believe any of this
stuff when you follow the five resets
and the 15 science spe strategies your
body it's all based on the biology of
stress so when you start the process and
you go through the first technique and
the second technique your brain and your
body will just know what to do because
you will be doing the work it's all
about the work of doing and when you do
better you feel better that's the Mind
Body Connection your brain and your body
are constantly speaking to each other
they're inextricably linked what's good
for your body is good for your brain and
when you do better you feel better but
it's all in the doing and getting
yourself into that moment of action when
you have the information but you need to
act it's all about small keeping it
smaller than you think it is so it's not
about going to the gym for an hour every
day when you're stressed forget it your
amydala and prefrontal cortex will be
duking it out for that one no way you're
not going to go it's like you're waiting
through molasses to put your sneakers on
but if you start small and say I'm going
to go for a 5 minute walk today you'll
do it but sometimes it's so small that
it's almost humiliating it's so small
that it seems trivial that's how it
feels right for two minutes what's that
going to do two minute walk that's
that's gonna do nothing trust the
process I'm not going to lose any belly
fat with two minutes it's not about
losing belly fat so the Cosmetic promise
of Fitness has never propelled any of my
patients from going from lifelong
non-exercisers to exercisers taught
muscular physiques never the reason
people exercise people start exercising
because because those are all
aspirational things it's like they're
Out Of Reach most people who exercise at
least in my experience who I have been
able to convince to exercise they
exercise because of the mental health
promise not the physical health promise
in turn they might have some weight loss
you know we know that even if you exer
exercise on a regular basis and have no
weight reduction whatsoever you are
still improving your cardiovascular
health your metabolic Health all of the
other profiles you can still improve
even without any weight change what my
thing is about stress right like so
mental health so that's just the
physical health aspect of it even just a
155 twom minute walk can make a
difference in your biology of stress I
read in there was a study in your book
about how just taking even a 10-second
break from your work and have an impact
on your stress levels that study was
done by Microsoft
Labs you know how we say you you'll
often hear like oh just take a break and
you know take because we often when
we're feeling a sense of burnout an
atypical burnout and inability to
disconnect from work right and then it's
like how are you going to get yourself
back on track I call it the goldilux
principle I talk about it in the five
resets human productivity functions on a
curve it's not linear it's not like okay
like I'm going to just keep being
productive there's actually a
bell-shaped curve for stress as there is
a bell-shaped curve for human
productivity and so if you think about
one side you know the the Y AIS as human
productivity and the x axis as stress
it's a bell-shaped curve so when we are
to the left of the curve we're not
feeling very motivated we're bored we're
apathetic chances are you're not going
to be very
productive when you are to the far right
of the Cur cve you're highly stressed
you're anxious many of us are feeling
this way you're not going to be very
productive there is a sweet spot of
human productivity right in the middle
of that bell-shaped curve and that is
the Goldilocks principle the just right
part of stress and human productivity
now many of us are to the right of the
curve we are anxious and keyed up and
stressed out and we're not very
productive so how do we bring the
science into everyday life and apply it
to our life we can't just like chill out
and like go for a month to Bali for a
surfing holiday wish I could can't do it
can't you know spend six months eating
my way through Italy or hanging out in
the Himalayas in a retreat all of these
things are my dreams you have Financial
constraints you have constraints with
your family obligations all of these
things and so we can't do all of those
things to suddenly scale back into that
sweet spot of human productivity so what
can we do we can honor hour breaks and
there was a study by Microsoft done not
too long ago which showed that even
taking 10minute breaks like three to
four 10 minute breaks throughout the day
can have a cumulative impact on your
stress and can help with your mood
productivity sense of Engagement so it's
not like oh breaks are nice to have they
should be an essential part of your
workday because it helps manage your
stress in the workday it is a way to
honor your breaks to get back into that
sweet spot of human productivity so that
you can have just right stress and with
that idea of Just Right stress I want to
make a point that not all stress is bad
stress isn't the enemy our cultural
perception of it is there is good stress
and bad stress good stress is adaptive
stress that's the scientific term for
healthy good stress bad stress is
maladaptive stress that is the
scientific term everything good in your
life was created because of a little bit
of stress like you started this podcast
something really positive you met your
girlfriend also something positive you
may have made a new friend as an adult
wonderful and positive cheering for your
favorite sports team also a positive
thing now when we think of the word
stress in modern culture we think about
bad stress bad stress are all of the
things that we already know right like
the feelings that we've talked about but
the goal of life is not to live a life
without stress because that is
biologically impossible our brains and
our bodies need stress to survive it is
to live a life with healthy manageable
stress it's to move away from unhealthy
stress back to healthy stress I my
calendar and people see my calendar a
lot because we have this um Vlog Channel
my calendar is full of just like back to
back to back to back meetings I actually
had a conversation with my assistant the
other day I was like um when you look at
my calendar there's actually not a a
60-second gap between meetings which
means I'm continually like late because
meetings always run over and also you
have to travel between one meeting to
the next or at least you might have to
load up Zoom or something which takes
like 30 seconds so I'm going to be 30
seconds late because there's not a gap
and when I was reading in your book
about this Microsoft study that compared
brain scans of people who were in
back-to-back meetings with those who
took short breaks and they found that
the group taking short breaks
experienced significantly less stress it
made a lot of sense to me because when
I'm back to back to back to back to back
to back to back it's kind of like your
Kettle example you have the I'll put it
on the screen the the kettle analogy of
stress I just feel like it's filling up
with steam you know and then in the
kettle analogy when the steam comes out
of the nose of the kettle that's kind of
when you like let some of the stress out
so taking those gaps opening the lever
oh you can open the Le that also lets
the stress out um that's what I don't
have in my day I don't have breaks like
when this podcast ends right people will
come through this door over there one by
one and they have and Jack's laughing
cuz he knows he one of them he's he's
wait he's he's closest so he gets in
first I have like 17 things that I need
to do for these people I won't even be
able to make it to the toilet because
someone's going to want me to review
something and that's my day every day
you have to build in breaks and even if
that means that you're putting it in
your calendar again this study was 10
minutes you can do as little as 10
seconds that research has shown why
because neural consolidation again a
very fancy scientific term but it's
simply means that when we are on the go
and moving moving moving we are not
always learning and so when do you want
to learn neural consolidation means that
there's information floating in our
brains and it consolidation your brain
lays down cements the information into
knowledge right so there's information
and knowledge and neural consolidation
is the process of the cementing of new
information and taking a break helps to
do that wait so if I'm listening to a
podcast and something profound just gu
said I should pause the podcast and just
wait 10 seconds to help with the neural
consolidation that would be wonderful
interesting as you know this podcast is
sponsored by whoop and people often ask
me why I chose whoop over all of the
possible wearable options and I've tried
many of them but whoop for me stands out
for several reasons a because of its
non-invasive design B Because of its
unique analytics and see a membership
model that continually evolves with the
product but the biggest game changer for
me which is reason D is wop's ability to
Foster meaningful Behavior change for me
with whoop I've been more attuned than
ever before on how my daily activities
can impact my sleep and stress levels
and their features like the whoop coach
feature which they recently announced
and the journal and the weekly planner
Have Been instrumental in helping me to
maintain health and fitness habits that
I previously struggled to achieve
consistency with if you're looking to
improve your health and fitness this
year Beyond January then you've got to
give whoop a try go to join. woop.com
CEO and you'll be able to get whoop for
30 days risk-free with zero commitment
and let me know how you get on as you
guys know I'm a big fan of hu I'm an
investor in the company and they sponsor
this podcast and what I've done for you
I put together what I call the hule
Steven bundle which is a selection of my
favorite products from hu including the
Black Edition salted caramel flavor
which is super high in protein and has
17 servings per container also comes
with their ready to drink product which
is one of my all-time favorite products
from hu the brand new and very exciting
hu Complete Nutrition bars this is
chocolate camera you can see from the
empty box in front of me that I've eaten
most of them right me and my team here
if you leave these on the counter for 5
seconds they'll go I'm going to say
something I've never said when hu first
made their bar many many years ago I
tried it and I didn't like it so I've
never talked about it on this podcast
they've spent roughly the last 2 to 3
years making a brand new bar which I
absolutely love if you want to order
them yourself and get started on your h
Journey the link is in the description
below in this podcast episode wherever
you're listening to it there'll be a
Stevens bundle link and check it out
back to the episode on this podcast one
of the things I came to learn about was
this gut brain connection yes I think
Tim was one of the first people to
talked about that but many of the guests
have have built on that knowledge and
now if it wasn't for this podcast I
wouldn't understand the importance of
the gut I thought the gut was just where
the food goes in chemicals attack the
food processes it poop comes out the
other end what I've come to learn which
is really surprising and amazing is that
much of my mental health can be
attributed to my gut that is incredible
isn't it isn't it it is newly emerging
science honestly every month we learn
more and more about the gut brain
connection the microbiome which is an
ecosystem of healthy bacteria that
govern the gut brain connection and what
you're speaking about specifically an
even newer entity called the psycho
biome which are a dedicated group of
healthy bacteria in your gut whose sole
function is to manage mood and other
mental health what so the the bacteria
my gut first of all I thought bacteria
were bad you know people always say get
that bacteria off your hands to have
some of this but you're telling me
there's bacteria in my gut trillions
trillions trillions of healthy bacteria
and microbes living in your gut and they
are very active it's an ecosystem and
they have many different roles besides
digestion we are learning honestly every
month a new finding what the what the
microbiome can do it can help regulate
blood glucose the microbiome and be we
say it for the microbiome because we're
talking about it as a one large entity
but what is actually the microbiome and
what constitutes the microbiome is
trillions and trillions of healthy
bacteria right so but we when we use the
word microbiome we're saying it just
because it's easier to say in parament
like when we're talking in your book I
learned about serotonin in the gut yes
three to five times more serotonin
receptors in our gut than our brain now
when you think about serotonin Stephen
like of course serotonin it's a brain
chemical right and yet what does it do
serotonin is like the Happy hormone for
like mood and stress mood stress like
you you know about the this um very
popular class of drugs called
ssris selective serotonin reuptake
Inhibitors they are used for anxiety and
depression and lots of other mental
health you know conditions and we always
think of Serotonin it's we call it a
neurotransmitter or a brain chemical
when in fact we have more serotonin
three to five times more in our guts
than our brains which just goes to prove
how important the gut is it's truly our
second brain so we can reset our stress
by resetting our gut brain
connection yes and how do I reset my gut
brain connection is it something that I
have to eat or so a lot of your
microbiome and the health of your gut
and your microbiome is governed in the
same way of many things that we've
talked about so sleep of course yes diet
exercise stress reduction there are many
many ways to help your microbiome Thrive
but yes food is also one way so focusing
on Prebiotic and Probiotic
foods um there's you know there's many
different Avenues to that okay so a
question then if I wanted to be this is
flipping the coin if I wanted to be
really really stressed and really really
anxious right and I wanted maybe throw
in some depression I if I wanted Stress
and Anxiety how should I
live that's a great question get on your
phone make sure it's on high brightness
and scroll through every social media
platform every news platform watch
graphic content of videos of horrible
terrible things happening in the world
at midnight keep doing that off and on
until 4: 5 a.m. your cortisol Spike
usually happens around 6:00 a.m. um you
know give or take for people that
cortisol spike is is a natural thing
that happens it's part of your circadian
rhythm it's what prompts you to get up
out of
bed um of course make sure that you are
you know you check your phone right away
right when you get up out of bed and
continue
scrolling um this is a really fun
exercise of what not to do rather than
what to do
um it doesn't always happen it like it
won't be one day because you do have
some reserves but if you did this for
one month I would say instead of like
one day I'm going to do it for one month
yeah 30 days 30-day plan to maximize
anxiety and
stress no movement whatsoever just stay
in bed stay in bed or sit you know as
sedentary as you can skimp on your sleep
as much as you can yeah in every
possible way sleep late keep waking up
throughout the night and make sure that
you get as little sleep as possible for
as long as
possible um don't spend time with anyone
spend you know don't stay on your phone
day and night day and night day and
night no
movement um what else do I go outside
okay I can't go outside cu no you're
just going to sit window no don't even
be near natural light okay just sit in a
chair if you can um make sure that you
have if you're on your phone great but
if you have a TV on make sure it's on in
your bedroom too on full volume all
night long is that that's going to make
me stressed yes it will keep it on like
a News Channel all night long okay so
you know we're joking about this of
course but um what I have experienced in
my clinical practice is you know we are
of a younger generation where we engage
on our phones but many of the older
generation people in their 60s and 70s
many of my patients in fact um were
using we're getting their news from
their TV and I've had so many patients
over the years who have told me that
they used to just watch TV that 1 hour
of news a day then it morphed into two
hours and 3 hours and I've had patients
who sleep with the TV on all night long
and they didn't start off that way but
it just happened that way again talk
about you know it's not the Primal urge
to scroll so to speak because they're
not scrolling on a phone but it's that
night Watchman phenomenon and so they
are watching the news all night long
they're not sleeping they're you know
really in bad shape and so moving the TV
out of the bedroom is one of the first
inter itions that I suggest to patients
like that I'm hungry what do I do eat
eat at all hours of the day and night
don't even think about it the more
processed food the better don't even
read anything about the Mediterranean
diet no fruits and vegetables Ting
reading no no water lots of other
beverages besides water more additives
the better um and no regular meal times
erratic food lots of it what's that got
to do with stress erratic meal times
well just because our brains like
compartmentalization and structure and
so when you have a sense of structure
throughout your day it helps you plan
better it helps get out of the fight ORF
flight mode and you know creates a
little bit more of a balance and um
that's that's really the main reason
what about multitasking you say in the
book multitasking is a myth I think that
I'm multitask sometimes 98% 100% of
people think they are excellent
multitask but in fact the science shows
that only 2% of human brains can
effectively multitask multitasking is a
scientific misnomer there is no such
thing when we multitask what we are
actually doing is Task switching doing
two different tasks in Rapid
secession the opposite of multitasking
is
monotasking and the reason we want to
monot task is because multi multitasking
task switching has been shown to
decrease and weaken our prefrontal
cortex it decreases our ability to solve
complex problems it impacts our
concentration mood engagement and a
whole host of other things at this time
in our lives in the world and the state
of the world as it is we cannot afford
to multitask because the world is filled
with complex problems that need to be
solved instead
monotasking is how am I going to get
everything done I need to multitask you
don't need to multitask it's a myth
you're actually not multitasking you're
doing task switching which is
detrimental to your brain and your
prefrontal cortex so the antidote to
multitasking is monotasking and the way
you do monotasking is time blocking in
fact I wrote the five resets doing time
blocking it's the technique that I use
for everything that I work on I I
started doing it in medical school cuz I
had
to consume vast amounts of information
and how did I do that so what I would do
is what is time blocking it's the
Pomodoro Technique you may have heard of
it it was developed in the 1980s
Pomodoro means tomato and um an Italian
researcher developed this technique and
used a tomato shaped timer which is why
it's called the Pomodoro Technique and
it's essentially time blocking so you
set a timer for say 30 minutes or
initially when you first start off 20
minutes 25 minutes and then you do
whatever task you're doing one task and
then you take a 5 minute break then you
come back and you do another 25 minute
section of work the next task and then
you take a 5 minute break 25 minute 5
minute break 25 minute 5 minute break so
at the end of like an hour hour and a
half you have completed all of your
tasks but you have been monotasking not
task switching so you're protecting your
prefrontal cortex strengthening your
prefrontal cortex and not decreasing are
making it difficult with attention
memory concentration Etc that
multitasking does multitasking make you
more stressed then
multitasking makes you more stressed yes
because it decreases your sense of
self-efficacy because most people aren't
good at multitasking so then at the end
you haven't really completed you've done
a lot of different things your attention
is all over the place you're on your
slack Channel you're trying to do five
different tasks at once you're not doing
any of them well so at the end of that
hour and a half where could have been
monotasking using the time blocking
technique you feel you don't feel that
sense of accomplishment or completion we
know that when we feel that sense of
accomplishment and completion we are
just feeling less stressed because you
have a greater sense of agency saying
like oh I can do this you know it's like
that same feeling of getting out of the
back seat going into the driver's seat
what prompts that it's like yes I have
the ability to get out of the back seat
and go into the driver's seat that takes
some hoods Spa that takes some agency
and self-efficacy so many people
listening to this and you talk about
this in chapter five of your book where
you're talking about um the third reset
so many people have that subtle you
talked about it at the start as well
that subtle humming of stress and
anxiety in their life it's just kind of
like a background noise of their life I
have that sometimes often I have that
subtle
angst one of the things that's really
helped me which you talk about in the
book is breathing and learning some
practical breathing techniques because
you don't need to go to I know a
therapist or go to some yoga class to do
breathing on your own especially sort of
short breathing techniques what is the
most effective breathing technique that
anybody listening to this right now that
has a little sense of angst could adopt
instantly and repetitively as a habit in
their lives that you've seen and that
has been proven to be most effective in
reducing that subtle angst two first
diaphragmatic breathing it's how we all
breathe as babies and somewhere in our
adulthood or young adulthood we lose our
ability to innately do diaphragmatic
breathing but if you watch babies
diaphragmatic breathing is belly
breathing or deep belly breathing when
people say belly breathing I need you to
explain this to me how do I know if I'm
doing it right put your hand on your
belly yeah one hand on your heart or one
hand on your belly or both hands on your
belly since we're doing diaphragmatic
breathing and then you're going to take
a deep breath in let your belly
expand here you're expanding your chest
but what I want you to do
is expand your belly and then
let it out with your lips purse your
lips and get it out so you're always
inhaling through your
nose and exhaling through your mouth or
your nose but you're doing it very
slowly so what you did initially is that
you went with my chest with your chest
and that's not diaphragmatic breathing
per se what you're trying to do is just
expand your belly and then let it fall
and you want to get into somewhat of a
natural breathing pattern you're forcing
it right now because we're doing this
like you know immersive instructional
moment but you can
then as you get better at it you can put
your hand on your belly both hands and
as you're hanging out talking to me just
let your belly rise and fall is there a
speed in which I need to Exhale not
necessarily you want to be as slow as
possible some people you know in some
yogic traditions say like the exhale
should be doubled and the inhale the
reason the reason that breathing is
truly a GameChanger when it comes to
your stress response is because the
breath is the only physiological
mechanism in our body that is under
voluntary and involuntary control so as
you're writing down right now you are
breathing your body is breathing you're
not even thinking about it and then
suddenly if I say Hey Stephen want to
try diaphragmatic breathing again you
can voluntarily start breathing again it
is the only bodily mechanism that is
under voluntary and involuntary control
your heart can't do that your brain
waves can't do that your digestion can't
do that it's all involuntary right it's
just happening but the breath is the one
thing that you can control and then let
go and it does it on its own and the
reason the breath is so powerful at
mitigating the stress response and
decreasing it is because when you are
feeling a sense of stress and the
fighter flight response your breath
involuntarily is short in your chest and
Rapid it's like this right you're
stressed your heart's beating and that's
also a physiological mechanism because
your body is trying to get oxygen and
you're anxious and your catac colomines
and your cortisol and your heartbeat is
racing so you're breathing quick and
that is called Fight or Flight that is
the sympathetic nervous system your
sympathetic and Par sympathetic system
can't be on at the same time so when you
start forcing yourself to take deep
belly breaths you switch your mode into
the parasympathetic system and that is
called the rest and digest system and
then that is what starts calming down
your stress response in the
moment and the second important
breathing technique that I would really
suggest people try is stop breathing be
it's a way to tap into your Mind Body
Connection and it can be really helpful
and the way you do that is and I it was
the first technique I learned and you
essentially just stop whatever you're
doing
breathe and be it's 3 seconds typically
it's done I did it when I was first
starting in my in a busy as a busy
medical resident I did it when I right
before I would knock on the patient's
door of the exam room and I would turn
the knob so I would stop breathe and be
I would knock and walk in you can do it
right before your Zoom meeting mundane
repetitive tasks is when stop breathe
and be works best you can do it
throughout the day you tap into your
Mind Body Connection you get a sense of
presence you take that mental break and
then you go on so for you Stephen with
your crazy schedule of not having even a
moment you could try stop breathe be
after before or after every single
meeting as a book as a book end and what
would that do to my brain that will
immediately set off that it will go from
sympathetic to parasympathetic so it
will switch the it will flip the switch
and it will decrease your stress
response in the moment it will prime
your brain and body for what's next it
will also help you in the moment because
it will make you feel grounded and a
sense of presence in the moment so it
will you stop you breathe and you be and
you can say that whisper that to
yourself as you're doing it and then as
you get better you know um you won't
have to say that to yourself I do it
constantly I did it right before I
walked into this building right before I
sat down as we were getting the mic
fixed stop breathe be just keeps you
grounded and in the present moment it
helps with the runaway train of stress
and it keeps you in right here right now
and keeps your mind where your feet are
we talked about speaking to people when
you have you know you're experiencing
stress but one of the things I read
about in your book is the importance of
writing therapeutic writing and how that
plays a a really wonderful role in
limiting our stress um is there any
research that supports the fact that if
I just go home and write that I'll I'll
experience less stress and if so what is
the research and how what's going on
there yes there's plenty of research a a
wonderful researcher psychologist named
James pennebaker from the University of
Vanderbilt um developed a technique
called expressive writing also known as
therapeutic writing and the instruction
is essentially for 4 days write for 20
to 25 minutes set a timer and just right
no one's going to see it just write
about a traumatic event that happened to
you so whatever that trauma may be I
talk about it in the book it's like one
of my patients who had a traumatic event
or if something's gone on this week for
you that you want to work work out it
doesn't have to be some deep-seated
trauma it can be like you had an
argument with your girlfriend you had
something come up at work you were
stressed about a project or you're
getting into an argument with your
parent or your child or whatever it may
be you just set a timer on your phone if
you wish or a you know oldfashioned
alarm clock or your you know your oven
if you don't have if you don't want to
use your phone set a timer for 20
minutes or 25 minutes sit down with a
piece of paper and a pen and just start
writing about the event and then when
the timer ends you stop and then the
next day you do it again four
consecutive days you might notice an
uptick in your distress on day two or
day three and then it will just decrease
that therapeutic writing has been shown
to be effective for so many things it
can be helpful for your mood and sleep
and anxiety and irritability it's been
shown to be helpful in studies to
increase your GPA to decrease Hospital
admissions it's been it's wild what
therapeutic writing has been shown to do
it's called expressive writing and
what's going on there in the brain
what's going on in the body what's
making the it so therapeutic I think one
of the things that is happening is that
there is we you mentioned this earlier I
think one of the things that's happening
is likely cognitive reframing so first
you are on day one and I've done this
many many times I practice therapeutic
writing on a regular basis on day one as
you're writing it's your amydala spe
speak right it's like your
self-preservation and survival and your
inner critic and you're like blasting
whatever issue is happening and then as
you go through day two three and four I
think there is you're creating a safe
space you're processing a lot of your
emotions it's very important to process
a lot of your emotions and you're not
keeping them stuck you're you know
expressing yourself and then I think
you're coming to your own conclusions so
there's probably many many things active
things that are happening in your brain
you are
moving away from amydala to prefrontal
Cortex because you're thinking
strategizing organizing your ideas
you're expressing yourself we know that
writing and just you know journaling is
also very helpful why because it is a
way to express yourself and let these
nebulous ideas become concrete words and
thoughts and feelings um and then I
think there's an element of
self-efficacy in a sense of agency
happening too because you are solving
your own issue or figuring out a new
angle A New Perspective persective and
you're looking at yourself hopefully by
the end through a lens of
self-compassion which is also something
that happens it made me think that you
know it explains why if I send a message
or an email when I'm stressed it's never
a good message I always regret it you
know like when you're having an argument
with somebody or like you know you might
be with your girlfriend or your
boyfriend and they've triggered you in
some way maybe you're tired and then you
start responding very bad time to send
messages very bad time to send anything
just stress stressed people are going to
send the worst emails aren't they
because the AMD is writing the email
that's right take a beat do it the next
day that's why they say sleep on it
right sleep on it if it's a good idea
today it'll be a better idea tomorrow
interesting wanted to talk to you about
this last thing which is live a lifetime
in a day I've never heard this before
but you say this technique is the
antidote to hustle
culture often when you hear the term
live a lifetime in a day it sounds like
hustle culture it's like cram it all in
in a day make it count no it's the
antidote when we are going through life
on autopilot and we are doing a million
things we often go to bed at night and
we're like What did we just do what was
the point of all of that right like
human beings are meaning seeking
purpose-driven
creatures and live a lifetime in a day
is my Universal prescription to patients
it is helpful when you have 70 years to
live if it's helpful when you have seven
days to live and what it essentially
means is that there are six areas of
what make up the Arc of a long and
meaningful life and the prescription is
to bring those six areas into one day
even for a minute or two so when your
head hits the pillow at night you have a
sense of fulfillment of meaning of
purpose the six elements of live a
lifetime in a day our childhood spend a
few minutes every day in a sense of
wonder and play whatever that may mean
to you work for most of us it's hours so
that's easy right like doing something
whether it's paid or unpaid that gives
you a sense of meaning and
accomplishment Solitude spend some time
alone to reflect and really think about
we know that spending time alone is
helpful for our mental health and
well-being also for creativity vacation
that's an easy one spend time even if
it's a few minutes a day doing something
you love and the example of that that is
the most common that I've seen with
patients is people love playing a
musical instrument let's say the guitar
and this is one particular patient I'm
thinking about and she loved playing the
guitar and I asked her when was the last
time you played the guitar and she said
oh my God it's been like six months and
I have three guitars at home and I said
why she said because I like have three
kids and I have lots of stress and I
have a job and my husband I said well
what about just like 2 minutes every day
like you know bring that into your life
you just do it for the joy of playing
the guitar and so she did every single
day and she played a song and then over
time she played two songs and then she
started playing 30 minutes a day but
initially it's like that you know cuz we
have that All or Nothing fallacy so we
don't do it at all vacation so build
that in a little bit something that
brings you Joy then family doesn't mean
you have to have a family but spend time
in community with loved ones engaging
with some people whether it could even
mean a quick phone call and then finally
retirement spend a few minutes taking
stock of your day figuring out what
worked what didn't and then that is the
prescription essentially to lead a
wonderful fulfilling life so when your
head hits the pillow at night you feel
that deep sense of satisfaction you've
hit all six areas even if it's a minute
or two you're like oh yeah I spent some
time in childhood I spent some time you
know and that is the antidote to hustle
culture because when we are feeling
stressed and burned out and always on
the go and living with our amydala we
often will be doing so much during the
day and then we go to bed at night and
we don't feel a sense of accomplishment
at all and then you wake up and you do
it again the next day and so how do you
bring and that sense of joy and meaning
and purpose into our life every day
that's one way what is the most
important thing that we've
missed so we talked about popcorn brain
and that's what happens when we spend
too much times on too much time on our
phone there is also this concept of
brain drain what happens to us and our
brain power even when our phone is close
by but not in use because of the sheer
potential for distraction
so our phones are really powerful they
are not benign
devices one antidote to popcorn brain
and to brain drain is a media diet and
there are really three ways that you can
instill this media diet into your life
to help with your Primal urra scroll the
first is time limits 20 minutes a day in
set a timer if you have to for engaging
and consuming bad news the second is
geographical limits during the day keep
your phone 10 ft away from your
workstation if if you can Out Of Reach
Out of Arms Reach and at night off your
nightstand keeping your phone off your
nightstand could be the biggest game
changer because in the morning when you
wake up like most people checking their
phone instead you aren't just scrolling
you're getting up maybe brushing your
teeth using the bathroom and then you
can engage with technology but that one
small shift could be key and the third
is to set some logistical limits so
create creting some sort of boundary in
a Digital Boundary could make all of the
difference in your relationship with
your phone thereby improving your stress
and mental health there's a lot going on
in the world right now there's a lot of
bad news there is Wars there is I mean
in the whole sort of two decades that
I've been on the internet social media I
have never lived through a moment maybe
the pandemic was somewhat similar but I
think this is maybe even more extreme
where I go on my Instagram and I
see videos and photos of dead
babies not that far away from where we
are in Europe relatively and there's a
there's a sort of trauma involved in
that so much so that the other day I
walked into the uh into my kitchen and
my partner was sat there and she's just
crying and she's looking at her phone
and she's crying and you know I put some
things on her phone just to make sure
that she wouldn't accidentally stumble
across those things things again and
then the next day we had the same
situation happen where she was in the
kitchen and she was very very upset she
was again tears coming down her face
she's like struggling with it for
multiple days in a row and it just made
me think that's an extreme example
but yeah I mean like it's not an extreme
example I had the same thing happen to
me I knew all the I know all the science
and yet I was also weeping and I think
many people are feeling exactly like
your girlfriend and the science supports
this you know we're experiencing in many
ways it's like the cycle of trauma and a
researcher who I spoke to from my book
roxan silver who is a psychologist in
California has shown through multiple
studies that your risk of
PTSD increases when you consume graphic
images even if the thing that you're
consuming is happening thousands of
miles away like the wall like any
conflict any climate disaster anything
if you you start consuming graphic
images and videos you increase your risk
of PTSD your own personal risk even
though you have not had any direct
trauma because it's indirect trauma that
you're seeing and so it's a cycle the
more videos you consume or the more
graphic content you consume your amydala
gets fired your Primal urge to scroll
starts going haywire and then you scroll
some more and then you scroll some more
because you don't feel safe you don't
you know so this is a common occurrence
it is not uncommon it is your biology
working as it should because it is your
biology of stress and clickbait and doom
scrolling are both powered by the same
biology that governs the fight ORF
flight response and there is actual data
to show that it increases your risk of
PTSD and increases your risk of getting
mental health conditions later in life
so years later when I think about all
the things that are going on in the
world I'm conflict right because you
can't ignore those things but at the
same time those things are giving you
PTSD that's right well the key is and I
work in journalism I'm a medical
correspondent it's not about censorship
being an informed citizen is critical at
all times especially now you have to be
an informed citizen but you have to
create some digital boundaries so you're
protecting your sanity and protecting
your mental health there are also other
ways that you can get involved by
supporting various causes and donating
and taking action we know that that is
also very helpful but you want to limit
your engagement with graphic content you
can also limit your engagement with
looking at videos and looking at images
and instead read about it right like
follow certain accounts that you trust
and read about what's happening in the
world it is not about censorship because
the news and journalism and I am
speaking from the perspective of being a
journalist or correspondent it's vital
it's vital to democracy it's vital to
functioning Society but there has to be
a line between being an informed Citizen
and protecting our mental health and our
sanity and understanding that if you are
having difficulty sleeping if you notice
any alarm signs like mood disorders if
you're having an uptick in anxiety
depressive thoughts thoughts of hurting
yourself hurting others that you should
seek counseling and seek medical
attention because these are not benign
thoughts like you you know it's very
easy to say oh but it's happening far
away I shouldn't be feeling like this
don't should yourself right instead seek
the help because this data shows that
you are at risk if you are overc
consuming there is a fine line between
consuming and overc consuming the news
at any time especially now but really at
any time you wanted to show me something
on the paper I wanted to talk to you a
little bit about this idea of we are all
hyperconnected we've already talked
about all of the data about you know we
look at We Touch our screens our phones
2,617 times a day we you know think
about like how many times we breathe in
an hour it's 960 breaths that we take an
hour and some people are touching their
phones like that much and if you want to
check your Reliance on your phone it's
very easy to check you just like keep
your phone far away three or four hours
and take a piece of paper and do a tick
mark every time like a tally every time
you feel like you want to check your
phone and see what that impulse is and
you'll you'll be shocked at how often
you're check in your phone I want to
kind of talk a little bit about this
idea of hyperconnected and that we are
all hyperconnected but we are
disconnected and I write about this in
the five resets the loneliness epidemic
it's really a pandemic globally
loneliness levels are higher than they
have been in years and one statistic 330
million people globally go two weeks
before speaking with anyone family
friends
anyone loneliness is something that is a
real concern because we know that when
we are not spending time with people and
we feel a sense of loneliness and that's
different than being alone by the
way when you are feeling a sense of
loneliness it actually has a health
outcome loneliness has been found to be
equal to smoking 15 cigarettes a day it
increases your it increases your risk of
heart disease by 30% it increases your
risk of Stroke by 30% and it shortens
your lifespan so um all to say that we
are spending more time alone now than
ever and you could be an introvert you
could be an extrovert it's not about
necessarily your personality type it's
about feeling that sense of connection
and community and that is really an
antidote for stress we have a closing
tradition on this podcast the tradition
is that the last guest leaves a question
for the next guest not knowing who
they're going to be leaving it for and
the question that's been left for you
is this is a great one for you I think
what idea that you once held to be true
turned out to be entirely
false I love this question and I've
thought about it so often because
I
one idea that I used to think was true
is that people's internal experience and
external presentation match up so if you
see someone who's really confident and
put together it's because inside they
feel confident and put together and
through my own lived experience as just
a human in this world as a doctor
treating patients as a speaker speaking
to tens of thousands of people I so
deeply know that that is not true that
people people will often look a certain
way and look put together and confident
and happy and smiling but they are
struggling inside and so I try to do
this it's a you know corny cliche but be
kinder than necessary because everyone
is fighting a battle you know so little
about thank you so much thank you so
much for both the wonderful compliments
you've given us on and off camera about
what we do here but thank you for
helping us build the show make it even
better the things that you about in your
book is so timely you know the subject
matter of stress and burnout and
resilience and all of these things are
so timely and reading through the book
has helped me to reframe both my
perspective but maybe even more
interestingly some of my
terminology because there is certain
loaded terminology that we all use and
there's certain ideas we have about
stress and resilience and stereotypes
that are completely unhealthy that I'm
I'm 100% guilty of um using and
furthering
you're also a wonderful Communicator I
think the way that you approach this
subject matter is through a very
empathetic lens and you're able I think
to bring both sides of the conversation
and the argument per se with you and
when I say both sides of the argument I
mean the people on the the one side who
think that um all stress is great and
that you know the hustle culture side
but also the other side that think we
should never do anything that stressful
whatsoever there's a there's a nuanced
Middle Ground which you approach so
articulately B Bas on science and the
the work that you've done for the
entirety of your life and it's such
important work it's increasingly more
important work um and hopefully more of
us can realize that chronic stress is
not natural it's not to be glamorized
per se and it is not a sign of success
and really there's something else we
should be aiming at in our lives which
will get us closer to the happiness
fulfillment connection that we're all
seeking and that's what your book
Endeavors to do and does so well so
thank you for being here today and thank
you for the the wisdom and the gems that
you've given me cuz I'm sure it'll
change my life and nudge me in a better
direction thank you so much Stephen like
I told you before I am a fan and you're
such a great interviewer and this is
Testament like you're reading back the
book to me and it just is you know it is
so beautiful and you really get at the
heart I think what you do so so well and
I've noticed this when you are doing
your interviews is that you really get
to the heart of the person's work that
you're talking about but you also get to
the heart of who the person is and I
really admire that because ultimately
while we all do our work we are humans
doing this work we are mere mortals of
Flesh and Blood and I think that's
something that you do so well is that
you really show the humanity in each
person and their work but it's so much
deeper and I think that's why your
podcast is so successful you share your
own humanity and you bring out the
humanity and the people you speak to so
thank you thank you thank you honestly
you know people say to me all the time
they're like oh you must get sick of
hearing this and all that stuff but
every single time I get feedback it
really does I there's not been a time
someone has given me feedback on this
podcast that I don't feel like I've
learned something and in that what you
just said there I learned something
again you know and it's rein reinforced
something that I believe so thank you so
much for showing that you didn't have to
and thank you for being here and this is
the start of our relationship and I'm
looking forward to the rest of it thank
you it's really rare to be a fan of
something and then do it and have a
greater esteem for it afterwards and
that is what has happened today my
friend wow oh
wow thank you come give me a
[Music]
hug quick one as you might know a
company that I've invested in is now
also a sponsor of this podcast and
they're called Zoe and I'm coming to you
today with a warning it is January and
it's all of those diet company favorite
month of the year and that means means
that you're about to hear a lot of
jargon and words across all types of
media when it comes to diet culture
please don't get caught up in the fads
when it comes to your own health you
must listen to experts and that's
exactly what Zoe has Zoe isn't about
restriction or removing foods from your
diet it's about building sustainable
daily habits that will make your life
better forever they'll help you to
discover how eating in the right way for
your body with what they call
personalized nutrition will have you
feeling the benefits almost instantly
and far into the future if you're
looking to pick up new habits this year
then use my code CEO 10 to get 10% off
of your Zoe kit and do it right
now do you need a podcast to listen to
next we've discovered that people who
liked this episode also tend to
absolutely love another recent episode
we've done so I've linked that episode
in the description below I know you'll
enjoy
it
[Music]
a